



A beverage company’s computer honored Michael Jordan before the NBA did - SBNation.com



































































































Skip to main content



clock
menu
more-arrow
no
yes








SBNation.com homepage


Horizontal - White

















SBNation.com homepage


Horizontal - White












Horizontal - White















Log in or sign up



Log In


Sign Up




Site search

Search
Search





SBNation.com main menu



              Blogs
              
              



              Secret Base
              
              



              NFL
              
                




              NBA
              
                




              WNBA
              
                




              MLB
              
                




              CFB
              
                




              Soccer
              
                




              UFC
              
                




              Wrestling
              
              



              NHL
              
                




              CBB
              
                




              Features
              
              



              DraftKings Nation
              
              



              Cycling
              
              



              Boxing
              
              



              Podcasts
              
              



              Outsports
              
              



            More
            


















            Blogs
            
          



            Secret Base
            
          



            NFL
            
              





                          All NFL
                        



                          Fantasy Football
                        



                          Arizona Cardinals
                        



                          Atlanta Falcons
                        



                          Baltimore Ravens
                        



                          Buffalo Bills
                        



                          Carolina Panthers
                        



                          Chicago Bears
                        



                          Cincinnati Bengals
                        



                          Cleveland Browns
                        



                          Dallas Cowboys
                        



                          Denver Broncos
                        





                          Detroit Lions
                        



                          Green Bay Packers
                        



                          Houston Texans
                        



                          Indianapolis Colts
                        



                          Jacksonville Jaguars
                        



                          Kansas City Chiefs
                        



                          Las Vegas Raiders
                        



                          Los Angeles Rams
                        



                          Miami Dolphins
                        



                          Minnesota Vikings
                        



                          New England Patriots
                        





                          New Orleans Saints
                        



                          New York Giants
                        



                          New York Jets
                        



                          Philadelphia Eagles
                        



                          Pittsburgh Steelers
                        



                          Los Angeles Chargers
                        



                          San Francisco 49ers
                        



                          Seattle Seahawks
                        



                          Tampa Bay Buccaneers
                        



                          Tennessee Titans
                        



                          Washington Football Team
                        






            NBA
            
              





                          All NBA
                        



                          WNBA
                        



                          Atlanta Hawks
                        



                          Boston Celtics
                        



                          Brooklyn Nets
                        



                          Charlotte Hornets
                        



                          Chicago Bulls
                        



                          Cleveland Cavaliers
                        



                          Dallas Mavericks
                        



                          Denver Nuggets
                        



                          Detroit Pistons
                        



                          Golden State Warriors
                        





                          Houston Rockets
                        



                          Indiana Pacers
                        



                          Los Angeles Clippers
                        



                          Los Angeles Lakers
                        



                          Memphis Grizzlies
                        



                          Miami Heat
                        



                          Milwaukee Bucks
                        



                          Minnesota Timberwolves
                        



                          New Orleans Pelicans
                        



                          New York Knicks
                        



                          Oklahoma City Thunder
                        



                          Orlando Magic
                        





                          Philadelphia 76ers
                        



                          Phoenix Suns
                        



                          Portland Trail Blazers
                        



                          Sacramento Kings
                        



                          San Antonio Spurs
                        



                          Sonics Rising
                        



                          Toronto Raptors
                        



                          Utah Jazz
                        



                          Washington Wizards
                        



                          NBA 2K
                        



                          G-League and International
                        






            WNBA
            
              





                          Swish Appeal
                        



                          Los Angeles Sparks
                        



                          Minnesota Lynx
                        





                          New York Liberty
                        



                          Washington Mystics
                        






            MLB
            
              





                          All MLB
                        



                          Arizona Diamondbacks
                        



                          Atlanta Braves
                        



                          Baltimore Orioles
                        



                          Boston Red Sox
                        



                          Chicago Cubs
                        



                          Chicago White Sox
                        



                          Cincinnati Reds
                        



                          Cleveland Indians
                        



                          Colorado Rockies
                        



                          Detroit Tigers
                        



                          Houston Astros
                        





                          Kansas City Royals
                        



                          Los Angeles Angels
                        



                          Los Angeles Dodgers
                        



                          Miami Marlins
                        



                          Milwaukee Brewers
                        



                          Minnesota Twins
                        



                          New York Mets
                        



                          New York Yankees
                        



                          Oakland Athletics
                        



                          Philadelphia Phillies
                        



                          Pittsburgh Pirates
                        





                          San Diego Padres
                        



                          San Francisco Giants
                        



                          Seattle Mariners
                        



                          St. Louis Cardinals
                        



                          Tampa Bay Rays
                        



                          Texas Rangers
                        



                          Toronto Blue Jays
                        



                          Washington Nationals
                        



                          Fake Teams
                        



                          MLB Trade Rumors
                        



                          Sabermetrics
                        






            CFB
            
              




                          All CFB
                        



                          Banner Society
                        



                          View team list
                        





            Soccer
            
              





                          All Soccer
                        



                          German Bundesliga
                        



                          English Premier League
                        





                          Italian Serie A
                        



                          MLS
                        



                          NWSL
                        





                          Spanish La Liga
                        



                          View team list
                        






            UFC
            
              





                          MMA Fighting
                        



                          Bloody Elbow
                        



                          MMA Fighters
                        





                          MMA Fight Schedule
                        



                          MMA Mania
                        






            Wrestling
            
          



            NHL
            
              





                          All NHL
                        



                          NWHL, CWHL and NCAA Women
                        



                          Anaheim Ducks
                        



                          Arizona Coyotes
                        



                          Boston Bruins
                        



                          Buffalo Sabres
                        



                          Calgary Flames
                        



                          Carolina Hurricanes
                        



                          Chicago Blackhawks
                        



                          Colorado Avalanche
                        



                          Columbus Blue Jackets
                        



                          Dallas Stars
                        





                          Detroit Red Wings
                        



                          Edmonton Oilers
                        



                          Florida Panthers
                        



                          Los Angeles Kings
                        



                          Minnesota Wild
                        



                          Montreal Canadiens
                        



                          Nashville Predators
                        



                          New Jersey Devils
                        



                          New York Islanders
                        



                          New York Rangers
                        



                          Ottawa Senators
                        





                          Philadelphia Flyers
                        



                          Pittsburgh Penguins
                        



                          San Jose Sharks
                        



                          St. Louis Blues
                        



                          Tampa Bay Lightning
                        



                          Toronto Maple Leafs
                        



                          Vancouver Canucks
                        



                          Vegas Golden Knights
                        



                          Washington Capitals
                        



                          Winnipeg Jets
                        



                          NCAA Hockey
                        






            CBB
            
              




                          Men’s CBB
                        



                          Women’s CBB
                        



                          Bracketology
                        



                          View team list
                        





            Features
            
          



            DraftKings Nation
            
          



            Cycling
            
          



            Boxing
            
          



            Podcasts
            
          



            Outsports
            
          

✕














A booze company deemed Michael Jordan MVP before the NBA ever did

Seagram’s computer algorithm suggested Jordan had the NBA’s most impressive stats as far back as his rookie season.


    
      By
      
Seth Rosenthal



          Mar  8, 2021
        






      / 
new











Share this story




Share this on Facebook





Share this on Twitter








Share
All sharing options






Share
All sharing options for:
A booze company deemed Michael Jordan MVP before the NBA ever did












Reddit







Pocket









Flipboard





Email




















Michael Jordan poses with the tastiest trophy he’d ever win
AP








Sometimes when you’re looking for other stuff, you stumble across an old article in which Michael Jordan is quoted giving thanks to a computer ...










Forth Worth Star-Telegram (May 28, 1987)


... and then you gotta go figure out what the deal was there. So this is that.

I’m fascinated by the first chapter of Michael Jordan’s career. Before Jordan enjoyed the company of any star-level teammates, before his Chicago Bulls came even close to a championship, MJ’s statistical profile described a superstar performing basically alone. Jordan’s third season, 1986-87, represents the peak of this era. The year he turned 24, Jordan recorded the fifth-highest single-season usage rate in Basketball-Reference’s database, which goes back to 1978. And Jordan didn’t crank up his usage by hunting triple-doubles; Michael shot. His 3,041 points on 2,279 field goal attempts in ‘86-’87 are the single-season records for any NBA player not named Wilt Chamberlain, and that data goes all the way back to the beginning. No other Bull that season came close to even half of that production. Jordan scored more points than any three of his ‘86-’87 teammates combined. This is, perhaps, not the most sustainable path to success, as evidenced by those Bulls winning just 40 games.
Still, Jordan warranted some sort of recognition for dragging a team to the playoffs by himself. Some people thought he deserved to be named the NBA’s 1987 Most Valuable Player. Just not enough of them. When media members voted on that award, Jordan received ten first-place votes, and a pretty substantial share of the overall vote total ... but a distant second-place to Magic Johnson. Magic won his first regular-season MVP by leading the LA Lakers in scoring, but mostly by distributing a historically notable number of assists to a supporting cast vastly more talented than the one surrounding Jordan. Johnson enjoyed the company of two future Hall-of-Famers and 1987 Defensive Player of the Year Michael Cooper. Jordan’s best teammate was ... I dunno, Charles Oakley? Those Lakers would eventually win their fourth championship of the decade. The Bulls got swept in the first round.
Jordan didn’t dispute Magic’s MVP status, though he did wonder what more a player in his own position could do to demonstrate elite value. MJ raised the ever-present question of how much “most valuable” honors individual excellence vs. team success:
“I’m not saying they (the media) don’t know how to decide,” Jordan said, “but I don’t think anyone knows what credentials should be used. I wish I knew what they were. I guess it goes back to history. The MVP has always gone to the winning team.
Well! Michael! As it turned out, the Seagram company wondered the very same thing. Yes, the people who make ginger ale and wine coolers. Back then they weren’t just an imprint of Coca-Cola. They were a huge conglomerate with entirely too much money, and they spent some of it on advanced sports statistics — a beverage magnate competing with the nascent SABR.
In 1974, Seagram began issuing its “Seven Crowns of Sports Award” — a computer-generated measure of the best individual performance in each major sport. As statisticians kept more and more detailed records, Seagram endeavored to analyze, weigh, and collate all those discrete play-by-play stats into a single “efficiency” number that would help them determine the best overall individual athlete, even allowing them to compare athletes from different leagues, if not different sports.










The Indian Journal (December 4, 1975)


You got a trophy and $10,000. Not bad!










Wayne Gretzky won a bunch of these bad boys.
AP


Seagram’s first basketball award went to Julius Erving, who played in the ABA at the time, instead of 1974 NBA MVP Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. A UPI report described the methodology:
How did the computer arrive at Erving being better than Abdul-Jabbar? The carefully programmed system took into consideration such areas of individual performance as points scored, field goal percentage, assists, steals, rebounds, and blocked shots. Dr. J., the New York Nets’ brilliant forward, received a 33.06 efficiency rating to 31.56 for Milwaukee’s Abdul-Jabbar, who wasn’t even second in the standings. 
If you, like me, have wasted any of your precious Government-Allotted Free Time reading about basketball statistics, you’ll recognize that those particular individual stats invite all sorts of problems, and so, generally, does the practice of combining tons of measurements into one all-purpose stat soup. But hopefully you’ll also acknowledge that sports statistics were immature in the ‘70s, so this is a good effort. Plenty of present-day dummies with much better information at their disposal have promoted worse all-encompassing stats than the one invented by the makers of Crown Royal whiskey. 
I’m also a big fan of anyone describing man-made algorithmic analysis by assigning agency to “the computer,” as if a PC is just sitting on a desk farting out sports takes unprovoked. If it’s the computer’s fault, then you can get mad at the computer, like this writer threatening violence against whatever machine snubbed O.J. Simpson in 1975:










The Journal Herald (October 29, 1975)


That same computer hopped on the MJ bandwagon remarkably early. In 1985, Jordan won Rookie of the Year, made the All-Star team, and ranked sixth in the MVP race, including a couple first-place votes. It’s pretty amazing for a rookie to get that much recognition from voters, but those human media members didn’t love him nearly as much as the ol’ booze computer. 










The Brattleboro Reformer (May 16, 1985)


According to the algorithm, Jordan’s statistical profile was better than the veterans who surpassed him in MVP voting: Bird, Magic, Kareem, Moses Malone ... all of ‘em. The 22-year-old sounded dismayed and even embarrassed to have won something over the actual MVP:
“I can’t compare myself to Larry Bird. I still feel he’s the best in the league. I guess I can say computer-wise I beat out Bird.”
Two years later, our more experienced, less bashful Jordan got another Seagram trophy, beating out the official 1987 MVP, Magic. Even if human media members wouldn’t divorce Jordan’s record-setting excellence from his team’s mediocrity, a distillery and its algorithm had his back from the beginning. 
Said Michael upon winning it again in ‘87: “I’d like to thank the computer. If it wasn’t for that, I might not have gotten an MVP award this year.” Nor that $10,000 check!
Jordan would go on to win actual MVP the following season when the Bulls won 50 games. And then the Bulls would, ya know, improve a lot more than that. Things turned out fine for Michael Jordan, is what I’m saying.
But in 1987, Jordan was still just a record-setting one-man show worried he’d be known only as a scorer, disappointed that reporters wouldn’t acknowledge his historic performance in adverse conditions. Michael needed some validation. So, hey ... thanks, computer.












    Next Up In
    
        NBA



Rewinding Candace Parker’s legendary dunk


Vince Carter once feuded with an entire city


Before Paul Pierce scolded LeBron James on TV, he battled LeBron’s family and spit at his teammates


LeBron James attracts many pests, but Joakim Noah might be the best player to ever beef with him


Vince Carter’s 10-year beef with Toronto included Nelly, a possible body slam, and so many injuries


Shaq sure does love to bully NBA centers for no reason




















Subscribe
Subscribe to our Youtube channel









Subscribe
Visit our store


















Loading comments...














Horizontal - White









Chorus




Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal Info
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status


Contact
Have a News Tip?
Masthead
Browse Blogs
About SBN
Company Blog
Blog Openings
Editorial Ethics and Guidelines



Vox MediaVox Media
Vox Media logo.
Advertise with us
Jobs @ Vox Media
      
      © 2021 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved
      
        Sports data © STATS 2018
      
      
    
















